Yeah, or you can hear it here, you know.
But what I love is that you can go two hours.
So we're recording now.
Okay, well, what's Barry Moses?
My library.
I love it.
Oh, I would just take a walk through it.
Those are my books.
That section there.
My books, the books.
The books that I've done in a lifetime.
Do you have a number?
Or is it a about number?
Do you know?
It's an about number.
About 230.
Wow.
Now, that includes the books that I have.
designed without illustrations.
That includes books that have jackets that I've done illustrations for it, books that I've done just a frontispiece for.
And it includes books that I've thoroughly illustrated.
In other words, basically books that I've had a hand in.
One way or the other.
I like that.
And these are my rare and fine first editions.
Your collection?
Yeah.
Can you briefly describe it to me?
The collection?
It's very eclectic.
An eclectic collection.
Which I think in many ways is the best kind.
I mean, it's just the things that interest me.
A lot of these books are written by people who are friends of mine.
There's some real good friends of mine, like Tracy Kidder and Bob Fagels and Mariani and so forth.
But a lot of them are people that I have.
Kay Gibbons, who's one of my best buddies.
I love Kay.
and Ann Patchett.
You know how to work?
Yeah, I like this one too.
I like the last one too.
I was just reading the other day the thing about heritage books.
And then there's some rare books.
There are, you know, Derrydale Press and there's this almost complete collection of Rockwell Kent and there are
Other things, I have a first edition of the Robert Bridegroom that Eudora Welty signed to me and all that kind of stuff.
I have a first edition of Huckleberry Finn.
Oh, that's nice.
Yeah, I got that stuff.
But there's no focus.
The only focus is that it interests me.
There you go.
Or that it's been done by friends of mine, people that I know.
What are the dogs' names again?
The big English Mastiff is Truman.
English Mastiff, yeah.
He's named after Harry S. Truman.
The small English manuscript is Ike, named after Dwight.
We go in presidential succession.
We started with Woodrow Wilson, and then we had Roosevelt, and then D.J.
And then, those are my only two dogs, the Roddy's Ball.
So anyway, that's what that all is.
And then down here, we begin doing other children's.
Down here, my grandmother would sit on the floor and read.
And then, unnatural history over here, being mythology and religion.
My medical shelf, our shelves.
I kind of sort of collect medical books that have photographs in them.
Photographs?
I'm not interested in medical illustration as such, but I am interested in photography of anomalies and all that sort of thing.
What kind of wood?
Cherry.
Yeah, it's all cherry.
This is an Italian terracotta.
It's not a terracotta.
Looks like Terracotta to me.
It looks like Terracotta.
Yeah.
Well, it used to be carpeted, but after 11 years and five dogs, the carpet came up.
Plus the carpet in here.
It's coming up for a long time.
Did you build this house?
I did.
I designed it and built it.
We built it in over the years, 86 and 87.
You were probably working on it.
I was in the process of designing it.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
This is funny.
I remember doing a 180 turn, though, coming off the road.
I don't know why I remember the 180 turn coming to your place.
And if you need a bathroom, they're all right.
Okay, great.
Thanks.
And then this is where things happen.
Uh-huh.
The kitchen.
Nice.
That's where the dogs, I'm going to put the dogs out.
I was just going to do that.
I'm going to put them out and put the fence around so they can't get in the door.
Come on.
Let's go, guys.
Charlie will stay.
Do you work frenetically?
You say you get up at 4 o'clock in the morning?
4 to 6, yeah.
That's a good working time to you?
It's the best.
That time of the day, especially in wintertime, it's still dark out.
I know the phone's not going to ring.
And once the dogs are fed and got all the chores done, that's my time.
Beyond that, I mean, starting at 9 o'clock in the morning, the phone starts ringing, the help arrives, you know, I've got things to tend to, I've got activities I have to oversee and all that kind of stuff.
So the work gets a little bit jumbled after that.
And then it's work as work can, you know.
Steve, do you know pretty much what you're doing when you get up?
I mean, you do...
I had no, when I go to bed the night before, pretty much what I want to be doing the next day.
I mean, do you structure it?
I mean, you do engraving, you do illustrating, you do... No, yeah, it generally structures itself, the activities, and it depends on what I have to get done for, you know, to make the production schedule.
But I found lately that I was amused by a story I read about...
Morrison, the Nobel laureate, Ms.
Morrison.
Oh, it is Tony.
Tony Morrison.
She said that.
She was saying in an interview one time that she didn't have any rituals, that there were no rituals that she owed to or anything.
And further in the conversation with the interviewer, she said something about getting up every morning because she liked to welcome the day, liked to see the sun go up.
That's not a ritual.
Yeah, that's not a ritual.
Sure, it's a ritual.
But I've been noticing that, I mean, I certainly have always known I have rituals, but recently I've been noticing that the pattern.
See, in your reading this journal, you're going to see things that I don't see, because I feel it's a day-by-day thing, rather than a document.
One of these things, I'm going to sit down with it and actually look at it.
Do you mind if I shoot a couple pictures?
Oh, no, no.
But one of the things I'm noticing is that the first thing I do, after I get to my chore stuff, that's always the first thing,
But after the chores are done, I spend generally an hour to an hour and a half reading and writing.
Because I would read Newsweek every week from cover to cover, pretty much.
That's sort of my... They saw that in the journal, though.
Why Newsweek in particular?
No particular reason, except that Newsweek in 1982 did a nice article about my Alice.
So you're loyal.
They were loyal, yes.
Time magazine calls up and says...
you know, would you get a subscription to Time Magazine?
I said, no, I subscribed to Newsweek.
And they said, well, why don't you subscribe to Time?
I said, because Newweek's done two articles.
I mean, Time's never done one.
I said, and this guy who's calling you is a telemarketer.
He doesn't have a clue.
You figure you're another guy giving him a hard time, right?
Yeah, but it shuts him up.
Oh, okay.
So I read the paper, and generally that's all done sitting on the property, you know, and that's my reading time.
And then,
I go in and I pull up the journal.
I always write the journal the day after.
It's a reflection on the day before, but I write it in the tenths of the day before.
And that way I find that it cuts a lot of the chaff out.
If I do it the day of, I put too many things in, I think sometimes.
And then I answer my email, write letters.
You like email, huh?
I do.
I can tell.
I'm sorry.
Because you're fast.
Even the one I sent you last night, I do statuses.
And you read that within eight minutes of it being sent.
So I said, the little things I picked up, you know.
I'm that way.
I make at least three sweeps a day to see that.
I love it.
Well, I pay $19 for my service.
It doesn't matter how long I stay on, it's the same amount of money.
You know, my daughter, she's upstairs.
Hers is $4 a month.
She has to pay for every time she goes on.
Oh, that's not so big.
You know, and it's wonderful.
It's there.
It's in writing.
You can choose to print it out or not, you know.
That's very interesting.
Here you are, a man of the book, and yet you certainly are adapting.
What's the word I'm looking for?
You seem to be making the transition without any... I resisted it.
...to electronic... Five years ago, I would have said I'll never get involved with computers.
I was not only a cyber-phobe, but a cyber-clasp.
And I had nothing good to say about them.
And then I started, you know, I just see what can be done in people writing, and I like to write.
I mean, I really do like to write, but I've never written because, for me, writing is, as I have found out, writing is a process of revision and revision and revision and revision.
And when you write calligraphically, revisions are a pain in the ass, especially if you, you know, it looks pretty
It looks real nice down the page.
You don't want to go scratching things out, you know.
And then typing, I've never learned how to type properly.
And I would be in a fit of inspiration or whatever, writing, and I'd hear the bell go off for the carriage return.
Then I would, of course, ignore it.
Figuring I'd get this one more word in there, but then I'd forget that I hadn't.
And everything's going in that one spot, you know.
And then you have a really great idea, but you've got to put another sheet of paper in.
I love my manual.
I have four or five manual typewriters.
I love them.
But you can type, and you've been doing that.
It's part of your life.
I'm actually terrific.
Have you always kept a journal?
No, I've kept a day book since the mid-70s.
But the day book was just a, I did this today sort of thing.
When I was doing The Wizard of Oz, I did a journal for about 45 days, which was a little bit more expanded than what I did in a day book.
But when I started with the Bible, I decided that being inspired by Jean Cocteau's Diary of Making Beauty and the Beast, which I had my students read, those who will,
And I loved his journal of that because he dealt with some of the poetic issues, some of the creative issues of making that film.
But the thing that impressed me so much was his attention to, or his talking about the mundane things.
The actor that gets a car buckle on his ass and can't sit in the saddle.
the Luftwaffe flying over and having to shut the sound down, the failure of electricity, you know, all of these things.
That really is what impresses me and why I want my students to read it is because this is what the life is about.
It's that day-to-day stuff, and I just decided when I started this project that I would do a detailed journal.
I mean, because it was the Bible.
Yeah, I figured this is going to be the biggest thing I ever do, and I want a real good record of what I did.
And a journal also serves as a legal document, especially if you've got a hard copy someplace that you can verify that the document you have in your computer hasn't been changed.
You can't go in and say that you were someplace or did something.
Like, I have my calendar.
I can go back and change it.
Well, and sometimes you do.
Sure.
You know, I go looking at my trip to Italy.
Well, I went to a few places that I didn't have in there.
And I certainly want you to put that back in.
And I've got proof that I was at these places, but I sure want the calendar to indicate that I was there.
Well, I do the same thing, but I have two copies.
I have a copy of a journal that I feel perfectly free going in and changing around.
But I also have the one that's pristine.
And I copy that off about every month, every two months, and send it to Bruce Kovner, who's my partner.
And so he had a hard copy of it, unedited.
But that demonstrates, that documents the fact that... It documents everything, yeah, absolutely.
When bills get paid, you know, what discussions I had with so-and-so and what we agreed to and so on.
Now, of course, doing something like that, when you say, I had a discussion with so-and-so and we agreed to this, that is, of course,
not a legally binding thing, it's just my recollection of the conversation.
But at least it records my recollection of that conversation.
Again, I haven't got a chance to read, obviously read the whole journal, but there's a Bible project that you have been always... Oh, Nick, I have wanted to do this thing for 30 years.
It literally was that which came to me when I first started setting tight my hands.
Which was in 1969, 68, 69.
And the thing is that when you start studying typography and learning how to set the type and all that sort of thing, you're looking at the historic models.
And what are the great models?
The great models are Bibles.
So I'm seeing the Bruce Rogers Bible, the World Bible.
I'm seeing the Gutenbergs and the, you know, all of them.
And then I'm thinking, wouldn't it be great to do this?
And also to illustrate it.
And so, yeah, it's been on my mind.
In fact, I think it was 1977, March of 77, there was a symposium on illustration or on the book arts or something up at Leverett, the Leverett Arts and Crafts Center.
And David Bourbeau, myself, Fritz Eikenberg, and I think there was a fourth person, I can't remember who it was.
We're on this panel, and we were taking questions from the audience, and somebody said, addressed this question to all four of us.
If you had any project that you'd like to do, what would it be?
Eichenberg and I answered simultaneously and first, and both of us said the Bible.
Yes, I've been wanting to do this for a very long time.
Doing it at every level.
It's not just doing the illustrations.
Right.
So this is really your Bible, I would say.
It is.
Well, mine in one sense.
But then again, I was just writing this morning about the book art's more akin to theater and architecture and filmmaking than the art of painting or sculpture or performance art.
Because it's all a matter of teamwork.
I mean, I can't do this thing by myself.
I can do certain aspects of it by myself, but I certainly can't.
do the whole of it, because I'm not a paper maker, I'm not a typographer, I'm not a punch cutter or a type designer, all that sort of thing.
It depends on so many people.
And the least of all of that is not someone to pay the bill.
In fact, it's one of the reasons I think the thing hasn't been done before, because it's too bloody expensive.
It's costing $2 million to do this project.
We've already spent 1.73 minutes.
So you figure, I mean, just the bindings alone are nearly $2,000 a book.
Why don't you describe some of these?
Well, I was hoping I'd have one here today, but it wasn't finished.
And I was going to drive down to East Hampton and bring it up.
This is just the New Testament, but the binding of the finished Bible is going to be similar to this, except instead of the handmade paper over Lent boards.
It's full vellum.
Over what kind of boards?
Over thin boards.
What kind of words do you use?
Limp.
Just so I don't have to label over that.
L-I-N-P, limp.
Yeah, limp vellum, which is an ancient means or way of binding books.
There's no glue in it anywhere.
It's a complete non-adhesive binding.
So, I mean, it's a little more finished than this, but... But this is vellum?
This is genuine?
No, this is paper.
This is handmade paper.
And the finished product is genuine vellum.
We have to kill two goats for every Bible.
That's the way it is.
I'm sorry about that.
You know what you're going to do?
There's sort of a...
There's something biblical about that anyway.
If there's any translation, I think it took 250 for each Gutenberg Bible.
Exactly.
Are you amazed that I know that?
No, I'm not at all.
I'm amazed.
They used to refer to prayer books and Bibles in terms of flocks.
This is a two-flock Bible or this is a three-flock Bible.
Where did I get that?
I don't know where I came up with that.
Well, it is a detail that somebody gave me, and I don't know where it came from, but I don't make things like that up.
I'm not smart enough to make a thing like that up.
I might just quote you why.
Yeah, but I mean, it's like, how many flocks of goats are we going to have to kill to do this thing?
I don't know how many goats comprise a flock, you know?
Maybe there are 30 goats to a flock.
I don't know.
But this is going to be a mini flock binding.
So are all the engravings done?
It will be done by next week, I think, or a week after.
I guess six more to do.
Five more.
Can you show me at some point, show me a little bit what you do?
Almost all of them.
Oh, yeah, I can show you exactly what I'm doing.
That would be nice if we could have a little... I'm engraving... Today I started engraving... I finished this morning, mid-morning.
I finished an engraving I started the day before yesterday, which was Moses and his sepulcher.
which is the next to the last or last image of the Pentateuch.
And then I picked up right after that, within 45 minutes, I picked up the next block that I wanted to do, which is the coming storm, the coming deluge.
Not Noah, but Noah and Noah's two sons and two cats on board here.
Do you know the word cat does not appear in the Bible anywhere?
No.
It's not there.
And I did a book a few years ago.
What's the word in existence?
Do you know?
Do we know?
Yeah, it just doesn't appear.
A lion appears, and a dog appears, and all that stuff.
But the word cat does not appear in the English Bible.
So that little fact, coupled up with my having done a number of years ago a children's book called Noah's Cats and the Devil's Fire, which is a—I've forgotten what the nationality is, but it's an Eastern European origin.
And it's a legend that the devil got on board the ark in the form of a mouse, in the form of a rat, and the two cats basically kick his ass off.
But in so doing, the devil retains and invades the cat's spirit in some ways, and it makes their eyes sparkle, and that's why their eyes glow at night.
That's great.
Yeah, it's a very nice look.
You're choosing, you're making the decision on what scenes to illustrate?
How are you doing that?
Is it more or less the way the text is progressing and we need an illustration here?
That's exactly right.
It's spatial more than anything.
Really?
Yeah.
When I did it, well, it's a long time ago now, it seems.
It would have been three years ago.
I bought the largest paperback Bible I could find.
It happened to be a new translation at that time.
I had previously gone through...
I don't know how many monographs on the work of Rembrandt, Mantegna, Velazquez, you know, all of my favorites, the Dores even, and made up lists of illustrations of things that interest me.
Now, if it were something that didn't interest me, I didn't make a note of it, but I made up this list and then I would see where Rembrandt did the same thing, Potiphar's wife, and then you would see another image of Potiphar's wife and then another one.
So I think, hmm, that's probably something that I should investigate.
So I made up, from that I deduced, or derived, I derived a final list of illustrations, which is, I think, about 300 potential images long.
300?
About 300.
For both the new and the old?
New and old, yeah.
150 each, about 100.
Well, the New Testament's only a fifth of the whole.
So the New Testament has, I think, 57 or 58 images in it.
And then each one of the other four sections has roughly 50.
So again, so you're reading the Bible.
Have you had to reread the whole Bible?
I haven't reread the whole thing, no, but I have certainly reread a lot of the sections.
And of course, there are some parts of it that I've read over and over and over.
Ecclesiastes, Proverbs.
And how do you pick a scene beyond the spatial element?
Well, see, let me finish this other thing.
So I took that list of illustrations, and I took this newly bought paperback Bible,
I put a sticky, a yellow sticky, so that it protruded in front of the fore edge of the book by about a quarter of an inch and staggered them so they'd be like tabs in a loose-leaf binder.
Then I just took that Bible and studied the edge of it.
That way I could see where it needed something and where it was all jammed up.
is totally jammed up, because you've got some of the greatest stories in Genesis, I mean, from the... I don't know what you mean, where it was jammed up in Genesis.
There were 15 illustrations in five pages.
Too many stickies in that area.
But in other areas, like, say, for instance, Ecclesiastes and Proverbs, there were none.
Because Rembrandt didn't do illustrations for Ecclesiastes, Proverbs, the Psalms, the Song of Psalms.
Or Job.
I think he made them joke.
Doré did some things for Joe, but he didn't do any for the other books of the poetry.
And the books of poetry were left wanting.
So then I had to go back through and pull stickies out where there were too many, where it was too compact with illustrations.
And then go in where it was too lean.
I'll put it that way.
Go into the places where it was too fat with illustrations and take things out.
And then go into places where the stickies told me that my scheme, my plan was too lean and put stickies in.
And where I had to put stickies in is where I really had to do the reading.
You know, I really had to find out what was going on there.
Yes?
I should have had that on the table.
The American Bible Society Auditor.
Yeah.
And what are these retailing for?
Ten grand.
How many?
Four hundred.
So they're also getting Andrews.
I don't care if they get Andrews nor they get mine.
How many are subscribed at this point?
At this point, what do we have?
Four or four?
Fifty?
That we have.
And we're only going to sell a hundred copies ourselves.
Heritage is going to sell the other three hundred.
That's why you were reading.
That's why I was reading.
Heritage.
Yeah, yeah.
But I remembered when I read the book, when did it come out, two years ago?
Boy, is it.
Oh, shit, don't tell me that.
Oh, God.
What did it win?
You up for the Pulitzer?
No, thank you.
National?
I was a finalist for the National Book Critics.
Okay, all right.
Which is not bad.
I'd say not.
I was trying to remember that the other day and I couldn't.
Four years ago.
Yeah, 95.
And it's been selling very well.
I've never seen it before, but I've argued that other people have done it long before me.
In the form of a self-interview.
and where I have a queue.
They have that in the journal.
I've seen that.
Yeah.
It's just a more interesting way for me to write about things than a simple academic discourse.
So you're responding to questions.
Yeah.
So I pretend I'm two people and I realize it's my image.
So Mariani wrote the introduction for the same image and he's talking about the—because that's all they did.
They did my self-interviews about the crucifixion.
And so Mariani had deduced that the muse is a big black woman.
And I don't know where the hell he got that, but I had figured out a long time ago it was a woman.
But he figures it was a black woman I knew when I was a kid.
And I dearly loved her.
So this started in 95, I guess.
Yeah, August 25, 1995.
And I pit into that date because it was that date that Bruce Covner called me and said he'd finance it.
So the big stumbling block then was the money.
Basically there were...
three stumbling blocks.
The first stumbling block was money, just to be able to do it.
I used the term today that I was writing in the journal, architectural economics we're talking about.
Because you can build buildings for the kind of money we're talking about.
That's for sure.
That's the first stumbling block.
The second stumbling block was that, and I think that I'm the culprit in this, but there aren't any engraving blocks in the market, wood engraving blocks.
The last blocks that I bought were so bad that they looked beautiful to the feel, to the touch, but boy, when you start cutting, they were awful.
And they're frankly expensive, something like 20 pounds a square inch or something like that.
I mean, it's like, phew.
But these last indefinitely, right?
Yeah, but still and all, the wood isn't good.
It can't get to the size I need.
Is it also that people don't know that this is a lost art?
Do you think this is a dying art?
Yes and no.
I think that the quality of the materials has diminished, but I think it's also that people who start cutting this wood, who learn on this wood, won't notice.
You know, they'll fall right into it.
But if you know the good stuff and then you come to the second, you know, lower grade stuff, it's too much of a shock.
So what did you learn on it?
I learned really good boxwood.
You know, really good boxwood.
And so now, I mean, I'd rather cut maple than the kind of boxwood I've been, than the last boxwood that I bought.
And where have you been getting this boxwood?
England.
Yeah.
And at the best sources.
So anyway,
discovered through Kim Marker.
You know Kim Marker at the University of Iowa?
Yeah.
His is the Stonewall Press and, Jesus, you'll have to memo me on this one.
He's one of the great printers in America, and he's pretty much responsible for the Center for the Book at the University of Iowa.
And he had sent me a tiny little piece of this plastic stuff with a note saying, I understand you can engrave this stuff.
I looked at it and I said, horse shit, that's plastic, you can't do that.
And I carried this little gray piece of plastic around with me when I'd go around doing talks and people would inevitably ask, why aren't you engraving anymore?
Well, there's no wood.
Well, isn't there something else you can use?
Reach down in the pocket and pull this little piece of stuff out and say, yeah,
Ken Merker tells me I can engrave on this stuff, but it's plastic, and that's crap, and I won't do it.
And so I said, that was three or four or five years I did that.
And I was out in Pasadena at the Art Center School doing a workshop.
Same situation exactly, except this time when I answered the question, I had an engraving tool in my hand, and I went, cut across the surface of this stuff.
It was so sweet.
Oh, it was so sweet.
You hadn't tried it before.
Never tried it.
It just looked ugly.
And it was awful gray kind of stuff.
It looked like... So what happened?
You were actually trying to demonstrate how lousy it was, and you did it.
And so what did you say?
And I said, you guys hold on a minute.
I'll be right back to you here.
Hold on just a sec.
And I made five or six more cuts to make sure I wasn't imagining it.
And I said, holy mother.
So I made a little drawing on the block.
and actually did some engraving, drew a little dog's head or something, and I started doing something.
Man, it held that line nicely.
So I got in touch with the guy and invented it.
Now, imagine this.
This guy has a wonderfully double ironic name, or a name of a double irony.
His name is Richard Woodman, and he lives in Redwood City, California.
That's great.
He's an Englishman who was an engineer.
He retired a number of years ago and decided in his retirement he was going to go back to his childhood hobby, which was wood engraving.
And he found out what we already know, which is there than any wood.
But being a chemical engineer, he decided to invent a substitute.
So he invented this stuff called Resingrave.
What do you call it?
Resingrave?
Resingrave.
R-E-S-I-N-G-R-A-V-E.
It's a cast polymer resin.
That must be a capital I. There must be a zero on the swing.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Specifically for artists like yourself.
Yeah, exactly.
But nobody would bite on the stuff much.
It was a hard sell.
Rembrandt Graphics was carrying it, but he insisted on toning the surface of this block with some sort of an Indian ink wash.
So I called him up and talked to him.
I said, hey, listen, could you make some blocks for me, but don't tone them?
Can you leave the material white?
And he said, sure.
So he started making these things for me, and we've gone back and forth on, you know, trying to get them manufactured a little flatter and type high and all that sort of thing.
It's not perfect, but man, I tell you, it sure made this project possible.
So you used these blocks for this?
Yeah, absolutely.
So these aren't wood blocks?
These aren't wooden engravings.
Now these are, oh, sorry, that was the book opening.
These are done on plastic.
I mean, and there's nobody, Nick, there's absolutely nobody can tell the difference between this and the wood engraving.
I mean, I couldn't tell the difference.
What would they look for to say it's not a win-win?
The edges of the white lines would scallop.
They would be fuzzy instead of really clean.
But if the tools are properly sharp, it doesn't leave that scalloped edge.
It's marked.
The other thing is that with the... Hey, Dan.
Dan, this is Nick.
Nick, this is Dan.
Hey, Nick.
How you doing?
There are no images that have any big white areas.
I have not cut any white out of anything.
They're all, because what happens is you have to use a router to cut the big areas out.
How do you spell that, router?
R-O-U-T-E-R.
That's what it says.
It has a Dremel, high speed router.
And it kicks up a stench.
This stuff really smells bad when it gets hot.
So I don't like the smell of it, so I decided I'm not going to.
So you're not using wood anymore?
I'm not using wood anymore.
That's a huge thing, right?
It's a huge thing.
And this is the first major book.
I've done two other books with this material, but they were books for children, sort of as experiments.
and seeing how well it would work, and also seeing if it would hold up under the pressure of printing press for a long run.
And I've got to tell you, it doesn't check, it doesn't work, it's cheap.
I mean, one of these blocks is like $25.
I mean, a big one is like $25.
And, I mean, the whole bill for the Bible and engraving blocks is probably $3,000.
And if I had done wood, oh my God, I mean, it would have been...
$30,000, $40,000.
Do these blocks have a projected lifespan per engraving?
I mean, they can't go indefinitely, can they?
As far as I know, they can.
I don't know why they wouldn't.
The only thing is that the material is cast on medium density particle board.
It's the stuff you use for flooring, subflooring.
There are several grades of it.
Some is really rough and some is really fine.
So he uses the really fine, extra dense stuff.
And unless that particle board were to deteriorate somehow, there's absolutely no reason in the world why these couldn't go on indefinitely, just like a wood engrave.
But now, after you do the run, what happens to the blocks?
The blocks then come here to be stored until we finish the project, because we're going to have to go back on press for a couple of forms.
You understand how that works.
You collate, you print so many sheets, you collate, well, you didn't see a boo-boo on this form, so your five sheets is short, you know, so you've got to go back on press.
So until we have everything done, the blocks are here.
Once the project is done and finished, we're going to select at least 30 of the blocks, and maybe more, which are one each for 30 deluxe copies of it.
And it's going to say that the deluxe copy will be bound in five volumes.
And each volume will be in a box, and then there'll be a sixth box that has either one or two engraving blocks in it, and then a suite of the prints and another box.
So the deluxe Bible is going to be like 10 boxes.
And that will, as opposed to the 10,000, that'll be what?
25,000, 30,000, 35,000.
How many of those?
No, 30 of them.
So it's 430.
Actually, the print run itself is more than that, but that's what we're going to combine and issue, yes, in 130.
And, of course, you go into this without knowing that you've sold any.
That's right.
It is a crapshoot, basically.
It is a crapshoot.
I mean, it's Barry Mosier, so we certainly know that you have this extraordinary international reputation, but nevertheless, it's still all upfront money without any guarantee of return, right?
Absolutely.
So you do kind of have squeaky jowls that sell books.
Exactly.
And that's why having one man who has an extraordinary collection of books himself as a bibliophile of the first order,
who loves to do this.
And he even said to me one time, he said, you know, because I was saying about one of the reasons why I stopped doing this, we nearly went bankrupt doing Oz and Huck and all that.
And he said, well, believe me, there's no chance of our doing that here.
There's no chance of doing what?
Going bankrupt.
I mean, you used to do this yourself, is what you're telling me.
Yeah, with limited partnerships and borrowing money and all kinds of things.
No, it's his money.
And we're partners, 50-50 partnership.
He's smiling.
But the rest of the tape shows very smiling.
It's wonderful.
I feel today, I think, what artists in the Renaissance must have felt like when they had a patron.
You know, I get a salary every month.
Really?
Yeah, I get a salary every month that I work on this thing.
And I don't get benefits, but that's okay.
The salary's big enough to cover my pennies.
And...
If I need something, it's in the budget.
I just, you know, I just order it.
I mean, regardless of what the return might be, he has to be doing this for the love of the project.
I mean, a guy at that level can't be doing this to make... Right, it's not to make money.
It's not to make money.
And this is an interesting thing.
When we sold the trade rights to Viking, Viking Studios bringing this out as a $65 book next fall.
This forthcoming fall?
Yeah, we're simultaneously... I'll have to get it for my Christmas friend.
I'll get you one.
Me too, of course.
But when they offered us money, I was—and they and other publishers, too, because we were doing a bid thing, an auction.
And I was insulted at the first offers to come in.
And then I wasn't any too happy when the final offers came in.
Was it an auction, though?
Yeah, it was an auction.
The auction started at $50,000.
And I think $50,000, Christ almighty, I get that illustrating a children's book with 32 pictures in it.
I mean, come on, you know?
And, well, the price went up from there, but, and I'm seriously getting depressed about this.
I called David Godin.
Depressed or pissed?
Both.
Both combination there.
And I called David Godin, because David, we've been friends from, you know, back at the old student days.
And so I called him, because he wasn't a player.
I said, hey, David,
Am I?
What's going on here?
I mean, am I off base, you know, feeling like I'm being insulted here since Paulo Barberi got $3 million for a tell-all book about O.J.
Simpson?
Because it's got to be worth more than that.
And he said, well, let me have the numbers.
I gave him the numbers.
I mean, they published it.
I told him.
He said, actually, Barry, that's a very nice offer.
What was the effort?
$150,000.
And it was, and their first round is going to be, I've got another $25,000.
I think in the first run or something like that.
Well, that's pretty good.
Yeah, I mean, it is.
It's a $65 book, too.
Right, exactly.
So you run the numbers out, which I hadn't done.
It makes sense.
So I made a note in the journal, and I said, you know, I think this, and this all comes from not making money and not being driven by money, because when Bruce and I sat in one of our first meetings, he said, hey, listen, you know, neither one of us sent this to make money.
Yeah, but that's an advantage, too, if the book sells.
Right, exactly.
It's just the advantage.
So I'm sitting there saying...
In my journal I wrote, I said, you know, I think this may be God's way of slapping me upside the head saying, hey, listen, son, don't lose sight of the fact that you never got in this to make money.
What did the jock say?
Keep your eye on the ball.
Yeah, keep your eye on the ball.
Know what it is that you're after here.
It's not money.
And what are you after here?
What do you articulate?
What am I after?
There's a...
You know, I had this religious experience when I was a kid, and I became a Methodist preacher and put myself through college preaching.
Rob, you must have told me that.
Well, it's a long time ago.
Long time ago.
The fact is, what's today?
Today's the 9th, isn't it?
Today's the 9th of February.
I'll tell you a story.
It was New Year's Eve, 1958.
I was a freshman in college.
So I can see it.
My brother and I were out crow hunting.
There was a ball game on or something.
We'd either finish watching the ball game or whatever.
We went up doing some crow hunting.
I was the only male person in my family that didn't have a rifle.
So my brother let me carry a little .410 .22 over and under.
He had a 16 gauge Remington.
Anyway, we go out in this field and there's a tree blown over.
And we crawl inside this old dilapidated tree as a kind of a makeshift blind.
And he got a crow call so he starts calling crows.
And I'm standing there and I'm standing with my weight shifted so I'm over here.
And I got my hand in my pocket and I'm holding my gun with my left hand.
No, no.
I moved
myself to this position, take my hand out of the pocket, take the gun and just drop it sort of by my side.
And at this moment, and this all happens of course in a second, at that very moment I felt this tug at my jacket.
It was in Tennessee so it's kind of warm even though it's the 31st of December.
I had on was a leather jacket and a t-shirt.
And wouldn't have thought anything in the world about that tug at my jacket except that almost immediately after that I heard
I heard the report of a rifle.
And there was a kid standing about 50 yards away.
He thought you were a deer.
But now he heard the crow call.
He didn't see anything.
Didn't see any people down there.
But he heard my brother crow call, pointed his .22 rifle, squeezed off a shot.
Right.
To kill the crow?
To scare up the crow so he might be able to shoot.
He was a kid.
I mean, stupid.
I mean, kids are, you know.
So it was a random shot.
Random shot.
Absolutely.
It went between my arms.
and my chest, hit my jacket, went into the pocket that my hand had just been in, ripped the pocket out, hit my t-shirt, made two holes in my t-shirt and didn't leave a scratch on me.
I took that as a sign from God that He had something more in mind for me and then subsequently I became a licensed Methodist preacher.
Here's the little rug on this.
That happened 40 years and 40 days ago today.
40-40.
40 years and 40 days.
And today was my hopeful deadline to finish all this work.
It would have been, I think, very significant.
So anyway, I had this release.
Today is the deadline?
No, well, it was sort of my fantasy deadline.
Today was the projection.
My fantasy deadline.
My projected deadline.
So why did you pick February the 9th?
40 years and 40 days since that event.
And so I'm actually doing this interview with you on the 40th.
I can make a detail out of that.
You can make a detail out of that.
It's a significant detail.
And the thing was, it came up in an interview with a local paper here.
And a young man, 23-year-old interviewer, asked me where all this started.
And I said, well, hell, I don't know.
Let's see.
And for the first time, I went that far back and picked that up.
And then I don't know what made me do the calculation.
I mean, it's easy to, from 1958 to 1998, it was 40 years.
But then we're almost in February.
February 9th would be 40 days.
So it's going to be 40 years and 50 days or something like that.
That was the projection day.
Yeah, right.
I have deadlines I set for myself which are realistic and fantasy.
I mean, I sometimes really like to finish by this time, but I don't have to until this time, you know.
And as I picked up in the journal, you've been doing other things concurrently, too.
Right.
Except for the last 18 months, I haven't done anything.
Except this.
Yeah.
And I don't know if I'll, I'll never know whether I was right or wrong in making that decision.
I made the decision right off that I would work the first year for only six months, and then the second year I would work six months or eight months, I guess it was, a third year, nine months, and the fourth year I would devote everything.
And I'd be finished if I had
stayed with it.
Have you scrapped anything along the way?
Scrapped?
I've got a shelf full of blocks that have been scrapped.
What happens?
It looks great today, but it doesn't look great tomorrow?
That's exactly it.
That's one of the things.
Another thing would be you start off an engraving with one mark, one line or something.
And by God, if that line's not right, everything that follows it just doesn't go in the right place.
It doesn't work.
And so there are a few that have
15 cuts in the surface.
So it's an engraving kind of like a watercolor.
There's no erasers.
There's no erasing it.
So you can't screw it up.
You can't screw it up.
It's one shot or chuck it.
If you screw something up, you have to incorporate it and make it look like you meant it.
It's like a cat falling off the table.
That's tough when that happens.
And if you're fortunate when it's a name that you're going to add on,
a syllable, too, and get it right, you know, but boy, it's just in the middle, if you leave, like a My Name Nicholas, they always leave out the H. Right.
I have an H in my Nicholas, you know, but a lot of people do.
And Tom without an H, you know, is the usual, but sometimes with Tom so-and-so, oh, God, I'm sorry, I meant to say this, T-H-O-N.
Yeah, I know, thanks a lot.
I got a medal in the Navy, you know, and they misspelled my name.
I actually went back to the Navy Department, I mean, it was nice to see what the damn thing is spelled right.
I got an award from the AP for the first prize, they spelled my name wrong, you know,
And I made them do it right, you know.
Not that they have it hanging anywhere.
And it's the first name, not the last name that they screw up.
Well, with me, they got Nicholas Varonga.
My surname is always getting killed.
Baz Baines is not an easy name.
You get the S left off a lot, I bet.
Well, I got Bash Haines, Baz B-A-I-N-S, Biz Baines.
When I first started at the Worcester paper, it was a hotshot reporter.
I still have this paper.
I had two bylines one day, many of them in this particular day, two bylines on page one, both misspelled and differently.
So one editor misspelled my name one way, and another one misspelled it another way, and neither one of them got it right, and that's wonderful, you know.
Both wrong.
Anyway.
Well, I get my last name misspelled a lot.
They put an H in it, yeah.
Moser.
Well, people pronounce it Moser.
My brother pronounces it Moser, but I pronounce it Moser.
Who do you think is, I remember so many areas I want to cover here.
I'm not in any art.
No, no, no.
That's great.
We're going to have the time to do it, too.
But we're talking about the engraving.
Who's the buyer for this book?
The owner, not the buyer.
Who do you perceive?
Well, unfortunately for my, when I say I lead off with the word unfortunately, I may wish I hadn't done that as soon as I finished this.
Yeah, unfortunately, the buyer for the Pennyroll Caxton Bible is going to have to be either institutions like the American Bible Society, libraries, or wealthy individuals.
But no, let me alter that.
And a fourth category are people who are not wealthy individuals, but who want the thing so badly because they love books.
are starting to put money aside for it.
I know at least two instances in which people, one, Ann Patchett, she and her mother are pooling their money to buy a copy of this thing, and Norman Stevens, who's a librarian emeritus at the University of Connecticut Libraries, and he set up his own savings account, a little savings account he put money in, so that when in time... For himself or for the university?
For himself.
Do you think it's a fair comment to say that every generation deserves its
I've written it.
In fact, you've been involved in Dante, and how every generation deserves perhaps its own new translation of Dante, or its new edition of Shakespeare.
Do you think every generation deserves its own, or demands its own Bible?
In terms of language, I think that's certainly true.
I don't think any of the... Or edition, I guess, is what I'm trying to say.
An edition, though.
Yeah.
But I'm saying, and the various editions that we have that have been published in the last, what, 40 years, 50 years,
all have to do with language.
And I think that's true.
I think that, I mean, even in my work on the Bible, I'm using the King James, which I think is unsurpassed in the stateliness of its language and the elegance of its language.
I also go to other translations.
I read four or five other translations to see what other translators have.
Hey, Dan?
Come here a minute.
You want to see something really weird?
Check the hurry before he quits.
Look at Truman.
He just bit off a limb of that thing.
Look at this.
The son of a bitch is tearing it up.
He's going to kill himself.
That's poisonous.
What are you doing?
Those dogs are indestructible.
My puppy that's sick, she used to eat the siding off the house.
She used to leave her in the car for a while, she'd eat the leather off the seats.
Well, yesterday, Truman was in the studio, and he just went, no, nothing announcing that's going to happen.
He let out this enormous puddle of puke.
Oh, that's great.
And it's not something I can pick up easily, so I have to get a dustpan out, and I'm squeegeeing the stuff up off the carpet.
Did he get a kick in the ass for that?
No, he was, you know, poor guy.
And it had this really awful odor, but it was an odor that I recognized.
It's the odor of a zoo, and one with these little pellets in it.
He'd been out in the woods eating deer shit.
Couldn't digest it, chucked it up on the rug.
Well, we talk about the textual edition, but I mean,
An illustrated edition, though, no, it hasn't been illustrated since 1865.
This is the first illustrated Bible?
First illustrated Bible since 1869.
Is that part of the attraction for you?
Absolutely.
There hasn't been one in the 20th century.
Why is that?
People are afraid of it?
Okay, now that's why I spent two hours this morning writing about it.
This is a question.
Now Ike's doing it.
He's out there taking that trick.
The question has been asked, and I have said this, and I've said that, and I have not yet...
come up with a good answer.
What I'll do is I'll print my answer out for you so you can have it in writing.
But yes, fear plays a part of it.
Fear of failing is such a huge thing to do.
Fear of the text itself, the lack of interest in religion and a secular society.
Most fine artists are not willing to let their work be subservient to anything else, much less some sort of a literary text.
I think that—and this gets real tricky for me because I don't think of myself as a critic and I don't want to come off seeming, you know, like I think of myself as being anything extraordinary because I don't think of myself as being anything extraordinary.
But I think that—and the hell is going on.
I think that a lot of the art that has been produced in the last half of the 20th century, especially after World War II,
has become increasingly puerile.
It is infatuated with its own self-adoring.
We're talking about art for folks now.
Art in general.
And I think that people, that artists just don't want to spend the time
They, I think, are wary of the—I mean, I say this from my experience as a teacher of art students at, say, RISD.
They're not taught anything about philosophy.
They're not taught anything about thinking.
They're not interested in letters, essentially.
And to approach a thing like this, at the level that I'm trying to approach it, which is something other than Sunday school pictures,
Jesus Christ, I mean, the intellectual sort of demands that it makes are enormous.
And I think that's off-putting to an awful lot of visual artists.
There are a lot of reasons, a complicated answer, but I would, don't let me forget that.
Okay, so I see, so I'll query very... Yeah, I'll do it right now.
Kara?
She's probably on the phone.
Would you print out yesterday's journal entry?
Thank you.
Is this book, and all of them, this is a book that's going to cost $10,000.
Is this book meant by you to be read?
Yes.
Absolutely.
And that's why I wanted, from the very beginning, I have been... It's not a precious object meant to be put in a glass cabinet and treated as an artifact.
Right.
It is a precious object, and it is going to be kept as an artifact.
But it's also meant to be handled.
But it's meant to be handled.
And the use of the materials, the choice of the materials, all have to do with things that actually get more beautiful the more they are handled.
I was just in Mount Athos in Greece.
I wrote a piece.
A Smithsonian commissioned it.
I still haven't heard from it.
I get a little nervous after a while.
Lovely piece.
But in any case, I was in this monastic library that's a thousand years old.
I mean, they have things there that go back to the year 963.
And here's a book from the 11th century, Vella Glax, you know, an illumination on it to, you know, gold and lapis.
And here is where it's really born from over the centuries by the monks and their oils, their hands.
And there's just a whole different texture to it.
And of course, it is a precious, gorgeous, exquisite object.
But it's also meant to be handled.
Absolutely.
Meant to be turned page by page.
A little dog on a page, you know?
That's fine.
That's the way it ought to be.
Yeah, I have people that say they don't want books that have been written in or signed.
I'd love to acquire a book that has the name of a prior owner or an inscription, a very warm inscription from a husband to a wife.
Right.
a mother to a child.
Our marginal note.
Our marginal intelligent annotations, you know.
If you qualify it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, no, I very much agree with that, and it's very much one of the reasons why I chose this particular version of the King James, which has no verse numbers, because it allows... Excuse me.
Here we are.
Yeah.
There's the answer to your question.
Oh, good.
This is earlier, but I want you to describe one of these things for me.
Oh, God, I'm going to give you more stuff than that.
Oh, you are?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But let me have that anyway, so we don't forget.
Have you seen the Prescott?
Obviously.
Yeah, yeah.
This is fantastic.
Look at that.
That's pretty nice.
You know that Andrew Hoyam is charging $25 for his prospectus.
That doesn't surprise me, but...
We're giving these things away, and these things cost almost that much to do.
What is he doing, by the way?
Well, he's doing a lectern Bible.
He's doing, but has no illustrations in it.
It's not a competition, is it?
No, I don't see it as competition.
It's just that Andrew and I are not, well, we're on speaking terms, put it that way.
The only fist fight I've ever been in as an adult was with him.
We came to, we came to blows one night.
Here?
Yeah.
Thanks.
Wherever you would do it.
Um, do you think of... Let's do it.
Whatever you'd like to say.
This is great, huh?
He's trying to do it where it won't show through.
Now let's do it right here.
It's kind of nice.
Make sure you put the date because it's the 40 year 40 days.
Yeah, we'll do that.
It's kind of cool.
Let's set this up for a second here.
We're back on again.
I might have heard myself telling this whole story.
I want to scream at myself.
I understand.
No, I think you're absolutely right.
I mean, the book has more to do than just the paper and the ink and the blocks being impressed in it and all that sort of thing.
I mean, it's like any work of art, if I may be so bold as to assume that this might be a work of art, it's greater than the sum of its parts.
And you are a person who involves yourself in every step of the project.
And I don't know if we've ever talked about that, but in this book, you're signing off on the paper.
On the binding, on the type.
And you've made type for this, is that right?
I had type made for it.
Matthew Carter designed a new typeface, and he designed some new ornaments for the typography, and he refit the capital letters for this particular setting.
So why did you feel that was necessary?
all of these different things.
Well, Psalm 119, I think it is 121, I can't remember now which one it is, but it's an acrostic.
And a lot of translations see that the Hebrew letters are left out.
Sometimes they're spelled out, you know, A-L-E-F-A-L-E-P-H.
I like the idea of reminding my reader that this isn't European literature, that this is Semitic literature that we're looking at here, boys and girls.
And so every now and again, give me the opportunity to put the Hebrew in here, and I'm going to put the Hebrew in.
And so that was an opportunity, and in order to do that, I had to have a Hebrew alphabet.
And I used to ask Matthew Carter if he would be interested in doing that.
And he said, yeah.
And he had a Hebrew typeface that was contemporary with the Jensen that he used as a model for Galliard, and so it's great, and it worked out nicely.
And I wanted a couple of decorative elements.
I wanted a pilcrow for my paragraph marks, but I didn't particularly like the pilcrow that—I hope you don't quote me on this—that he had designed for Galliard.
It was too black.
It just made these little black spots on the face.
So I wanted him to redesign it and base it basically on Bruce Rogers' centaur pilcrow.
So anyway, he did, and yeah, attention to that kind of detail, though, I think is absolutely imperative.
Are the book arts becoming a quaint?
I don't think so.
I don't think so at all.
In fact, I see an awful lot of universities and various schools and institutions where they're offering courses in the book arts and read articles every now and again where it doesn't seem to be dying.
And I don't know what it's... Who knows?
I mean, maybe it's a... I'm going to have to go out there and stop my dog.
He's going to get sick.
He's going to stop.
In fact...
I really do pay attention to all these details.
It's like being the architect of a building.
I mean, I have to, I'm responsible for all those things, though I don't necessarily, you know, get up and hammer nails myself.
Like, I don't do the printing myself, but I'm certainly in the position to, well, actually, I'm in the position to be responsible for that printing if it's not up to my standards.
But, God, I've got the greatest printer on this thing.
Yeah, it's really good.
I've never had to do anything to sit back and say, God, this looks beautiful.
And where is that then?
Austin, Texas.
So there's a lot of trust involved.
There's also that.
The building of shipping cartons and crates and all this kind of stuff.
I mean, oh my God.
See, that's why the journal.
It's to give anybody who's interested at some point an idea of just how complicated a thing like this is.
And all of that complexity, I hope, disappears once the book is in somebody's hand.
It then becomes this intimate object that cuts everything out between this text and the reader.
Now, you sent me that piece that you wrote on the self-portraits, but you did choose, I think you said before,
Yeah, but they're not really intended to be self-portraits, but they're there.
It's mostly a matter of convenience, more than anything.
Convenience of what?
Convenience that I don't have to go hire somebody to do it.
To do what?
To be a model?
To be the model.
Do you have a model?
Oh, God, yeah.
I'll show you photographs.
We probably have
3,000 photographs of this project, too.
Really?
Wow.
So there's a major archive.
Major archive.
And where will you be depositing the archive?
They'll all go over to Dartmouth.
That's where my archives are.
So they'll all go up there.
And does it go up there after each project, after each book?
Pretty much so, except for children's books.
And my children's books go down to University of Connecticut.
Oh, great.
Children's New England Book Collection.
So that all goes down there.
But I forgot where I was.
We were talking about models.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, I have, I hired a 65-year-old guy, former army sergeant who's a nudist and models for life drawing classes all over this part of the world.
I hired him to come up to be my model for Job.
Now tell me a few of these things.
Yeah, this is good.
I like this kind of stuff.
And then I have a young woman that has done some modeling for me for
my figure of the destroyer and so forth.
What were you looking for?
Is it the text that suggests the kind of... Yeah.
Well, the text, not so much.
I mean, like, for instance, the portrait of Jesus that you see in the prospectus.
I mean, I was sitting where you're sitting one night when you're having dinner up here, and a friend of mine had hired this guy to prepare dinner.
He was a chef over here in Amherst at Pinocchio's.
And I'm watching, and he's got this wonderful face, very chiseled sort of sculpted face, and a smallish man, you know, 5'7", 5'8", and black hair, pulled back in a ponytail, and I asked him after a few drinks and wine, I said, hey, Lou, his name was Lou Silver, Louis Silver, I said, would you take that rubber band out of your hair?
He looked at me kind of strange, he said, sure.
took the thing out and his black hair fell down around his shoulders and I said, oh shit, listen, hey, how about doing me a favor?
Would you mind getting almost naked and letting me put a crown of thorn on you and would you be my Jesus?
Would you be my Jesus?
And he said, yeah.
He agreed to do it.
And then my Virgin Mary was a waitress at Green Street Cafe in Northampton.
I saw her one night.
I was sitting there with Jane Dyer.
In fact, it was Jane Dyer that hired Lewis to come and do this meal for her, but she did it here instead of her house because my kitchen's bigger than her kitchen.
So what did you see in this waitress that all of a sudden... I saw not what one would think of as the classic sort of Greek classic beauty, nor even the kind of beauty that you would associate with, say, Playboy magazine, but a beauty that sort of transcends
that in a sense.
A plainness, but yet a strikingly unusual and a very large pinch of the erotic, of the sensuous.
And in my thinking, the mother of God ought to be a little, well, sensuous.
I would think so.
That's a pretty big order.
Maybe you're going to be the mother of pride.
And if you're going to get knocked up by God, you better be, by God, pretty good looking.
I promise I'll be tasteful at how I use this.
Okay, that's all right.
I trust you will.
But no, I mean, so those were the kind, and I'm also always looking for people who are a little bit of a cross type that aren't what you would really expect.
And that helps take me away from the cliched images of Jesus and all this kind of saccharine crap that Protestant illustrators have always managed to do when they've done images of Biblical nature.
You know, they just, somehow or another, Protestants have got no passion.
Yeah, when you just think of all the pictures in Sunday School of Jesus walking in the field.
And they all look the same.
Right.
It's the same face with the... Yeah.
High key paintings, you know, a lot of blue sky.
Exactly.
Or you go to Greece and they all look like Greeks.
Right, right.
All the saints.
Now, when you were growing up, did you grow up in a Protestant church or the Orthodox church?
A little bit of both.
Yeah.
I am Greek Orthodox, which is of immeasurable value to me when I went to Mount Athos, because if memory does, it puts you literally in a private church.
And you get special privileges, you know.
But I'm Greek Orthodox.
My father, who was brought up in a partisan orphanage, had some ties to it.
So you know all of those Sunday school documents, church for Sunday school, and we also went to Greek school.
You know the drill.
Yeah, absolutely.
But what you do is, if you're very traditional, how many artists actually do their
And then go and engrave them on wood blocks and think in terms of doing reversals and pulling blocks.
I mean, I can't think of any others, to be honest.
Well, yeah, there are, but they're not a lot of us.
And what is the appeal for you?
I mean, is it the degree of difficulty?
It's certainly a big part of it.
It really is.
It is that degree of difficulty.
I think it's partly having to do with the
With my tenacity as a person, I went to military school for six years when I was a kid, you know that, and in that military school, more than anything, I learned, well, how to survive, how to carry on in the face of what always seemed to be inevitable humiliation.
You know, I wrestled, but I never won a wrestling match in my life.
I played football.
I never played first string until I was, after having played varsity for two years, and I dropped down and played junior varsity, and then I got to play.
I was never very good at these things, but I've always been tenacious and go after things sometimes that are bigger than I am.
Knoxville is one of my papers, by the way.
What is it?
The Knoxville New Sentinel.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I mean, I'll do a piece, not just Biblio, I'll do a piece.
when the trade edition comes out.
It was foolish to do it for this.
That wouldn't help anybody.
That would be great.
That will be this fall.
I'll run that piece.
We're negotiating now what the exact pub date is.
I get the story.
I'm in sync with all that stuff.
For us, it's kind of frustrating because Bruce Cobner, my man, my partner, is absolutely adamant.
And so am I.
uh that the trade edition not come out before ours it can't well it can but it shouldn't it shouldn't yeah but it should actually not even be relevant i think to me it's too different it is two different books and in and in one and in a greater sense it isn't relevant you're absolutely right and i was just saying that yesterday to care i said you know fact is who cares i mean everybody who's buying these things know that we're starting to ship books in november and we will start with the first 10 that we get from the boundary
And then when we get the next 10, we'll send them.
And that's going to be a process.
And everybody knows this.
They get a letter stating this, that the books will be shipped between November and April.
And that is being shipped according to when you bought it?
According to deposit.
Yeah, the order of deposit.
So the priority in terms of the numbers is when you weigh in.
Yeah, exactly.
You know who's that number one?
Virginia Hamilton.
No kidding.
Yeah.
She has copy number one right now.
Uh-huh.
What would your hope be?
Would you hope to have this thing fully subscribed within a year?
My hope is that we have it fully subscribed by October, October, November.
I'd like for it to be.
And that would really be a nice feeling for you, too.
It certainly would, because it means that Bruce will have made back his money, and it means that I will make a little money, which would be very nice, a nice little reward at the end of this long road.
And then, of course, we have the trade edition.
We have no idea what the trade edition is going to do.
I mean, it's either going to go gangbusters or it's going to go tits up, you know.
Well, it's going to be a one-volume deal, right?
To begin with.
See, it's one of the reasons I went with Viking, because they've got some really interesting ideas about marketing this thing.
They wanted to—Bullfish, for instance, was one of the major places.
I like both of them.
They do nice books, and they wanted to go out with about a hundred, $120 book, two volumes.
Better to have a lower price for this.
Yes, yes.
So what Viking's idea is, you go out first with a book that you produce on a web press, and you get it out there in a fairly significant edition, and you get it out for a reasonable cost, $65.
Good quality.
They're doing three runs.
They're doing a run for the text, a run for the illustrations, and a run for the red.
Same size?
No, it's much smaller.
It's about this big.
So is this reduced?
This reduced.
Yeah, absolutely.
Just reduced.
85% of that size.
And they, but they're putting the panes into producing it well.
But next year, if it does well in a one volume, $65, next year, it's going to replate and do it in two volumes.
Sure, boxed probably.
Boxed up, little ribbon, three times as much money.
Nice paper label on the spine.
Exactly.
And then they're thinking, well, then what we might do is break it into its five sections, so someone could buy the books of history by themselves without anything.
See, that shows the great... It has, as they say, legs, you know.
But I mean, just the way they're thinking like that shows that they must be very excited to have it.
They are, yeah.
And it's going to be their lead book for the fall.
Is that a five year studio?
Oh yeah.
Not for Viking.
I've been working with these publishers for 21 years, so I know them intimately.
It's very exciting for me.
It is.
And for a buck and a half, is that the final number?
Is that what you sold it for?
That's a good price, by the way.
It is.
Nothing to be ashamed of.
I'm just comparing it to Paula Barberi.
I'm sorry.
Oh, yeah.
You know what's that other guy that did that book called Babyhood?
There's a TV star.
I don't know what, so I don't know, but some television actor did a book on babyhood.
Oh, my God.
Paul Reiser?
Yes.
Yeah.
I would like to strangle him.
That's right.
There it goes.
Okay, that's a self-portrait.
It's a portrait of?
It's Polyphemus.
Polyphemus, which is the one-eyed person in the Odyssey.
I didn't get any idea.
But that's you using it?
Yeah, that's me.
Barry, Barry.
I have better teeth than that.
I don't have a red beard.
The Blinding of Polyphemus.
And this book is The Trojan War.
And what year is that now?
Last year.
Any adventures?
The Dry Column.
Who published it?
Tomorrow.
I love their books.
1997.
I think they do terrific children.
They do.
They do so much.
Here's in the little, oh, this is a book I did with Willie Morris.
Prayer for the opening of Little League.
See, here's a little, in my pictures, there's a girl.
And here's a little guy that committed into a girl which never hit.
Comfort the smallest of the ballplayers who have never gotten a hit.
Little League season, that's the title, right?
Yes.
Prayer for the opening of.
A prayer.
Prayer for the opening of the Little League season.
Harcourt Brace 19, when is it?
Yeah, 1990.
Who's the author again?
Willie Morris.
And is this all a portrait in here?
Yeah.
And this is a portrait of Willie.
The umpire?
That's my housekeeper.
The father.
The retributive father.
The retributive daddy.
And then my self-portrait is here.
Eating a hot dog.
That's great.
Can you explain all this, why this has become something that you do in that piece?
It was a, it began as a, as a, the first time I did it was in Moby Dick.
And I put myself in the scene where the hands are swabbing and cleaning up the decks.
And it was a statement about the way I felt I had been treated in the project, that my intellect wasn't respected, that the only thing that they hired me for was the use of my hands, because I could engrave the wood and nobody else could.
So I was feeling sort of put upon it, so I put myself as a swatty.
And so stuck, I started doing it.
And of course, the idea comes from Alfred Hitchcock.
Of course, when you get yourself in it.
Sometimes it's a significant character, other times it's less so.
This is your hat and your helmet.
This is one of my favorites.
Did you illustrate this with Susan Leinart?
No.
Susan Leinart?
Where is that?
Oh, God.
And describe the picture we're looking at.
Well, this is a poor king that had nothing in his treasury.
And we're looking at this guy who's one eye and got a pair of glasses on.
And, well, I don't know.
I'm better at pictures than words in this thing.
But he's all squinted up looking at you kind of like, what are you doing?
What is he up in here?
Lynne Reed Banks.
Good.
This is what I'm looking for.
Just to give me a couple of lines of description.
And then... So is it whimsy for you now?
Is it almost... Yeah.
Oftentimes it's whimsy.
And A Game of Kitsch.
This is Richard Wilbur.
I don't remember exactly where I put myself.
This is a nice little book, too.
It didn't do well.
Maybe I'm not.
Maybe we found the rare book that Moser's not... Oh, no, no, no.
I know where I am.
Here.
Inside the fire station.
Wow.
In a window.
Behind the window.
Yeah.
What year is that?
Did you find them?
Yeah.
Well, that was my baby.
Um, this is... What year is this?
That was Katie who was called.
No wonder it rang and rang and rang and rang.
She wouldn't let it go.
1994.
She fell down and scared.
Oh, she didn't hurt herself.
Oh, sorry.
Yeah, she was scared.
And in this one, Donald Hall's When Willard Met Babe Ruth.
A lot of baseball ones.
Has been, yeah.
I make an appearance here in this scene as an old baseball player hanging on the wall.
Now, Rich probably has a bunch of these.
That's what I'm saying.
Oh.
If I go to the gallery, I could find these probably.
I don't want you to make a special trip.
We might use a couple if you had them, though.
They are colored, which is great.
This is, did you mark it up?
Here's the one in Moby Dick.
Moby Dick, which page did I have this book?
438.
And that's the very first time I did it.
That's the first what?
Uh-huh.
That character there.
With a black beard.
And here's another one, which is kind of funny.
Oh, look at that one.
Isn't that funny?
Yeah.
That's great.
This is Blue Jay and Swallow.
What are you here?
This is Virginia Hamilton's When Birds Could Talk and Vets Could Sing, in about the same time, 1995, 1996.
And Vets Could Sing.
Who's the author?
Virginia Hamilton, Scholastic, 1996.
This is a guy named, what is it, Firekeeper?
Fire.
Firekeeper.
counter-model point.
Oh, stop.
Firekeeper's sister.
That's terribly flattering.
It's like how photogenic I am.
It has nothing to do with this whatsoever, but that is my daughter.
That was right after I had a baby, too.
Quite that down, you say.
That's cute.
That's got to be one of your dogs.
Well, this is Rosie.
This is my beloved Rosie that died a year ago, October.
This is her daughter, Izzy.
Oh, so you did a... Yeah, Izzy's actually the author, or ostensibly the author.
Who is Izzy?
Isabelle Harper.
This is her daughter.
Really?
Do we identify her here?
Yeah.
And identify me, too, as, you know... And there you are.
When Grandpa goes to work in his room, my job is to take care of Rosie.
This is a very funny book.
How old was your daughter when you did the book?
She was, I think, three or four.
Three or four years old.
She obviously didn't write it.
She thinks that she did.
But that's great.
Yeah, but there was a collaborative exercise.
Oh, this must have been a great book for you.
I love this book.
I couldn't look at it, probably, as well, for a year.
And when did Rosie... He went through his reward on October 18th.
There he is, right over there in her.
October 18th, 19... And who published this book?
Last year?
He was an old man, was he, in 1994.
And the title is My Dog, Rosie.
And it's narrated by Isabel Harper.
That's great.
And he's named after Roosevelt Greer.
Isn't that great.
I helped him dry off before I brush his hair.
She hates his picture because she's saying that.
She won't, yeah, she reads it in school.
I thought you'd seen these guys after a foot, after a foot, after a foot.
Roosevelt, Greer was named after Franklin Roosevelt.
So it was accidental.
I had a dog named Woody, and then I had a dog named Rosie, and I said, wait a minute, that's Woodrow Wilson and Franklin Roosevelt.
So that began the succession.
That's a delightful picture.
That's very nice.
And that's the right scale, too.
Excellent.
Yeah, that's great.
And here she is, reading his favorite story, you know.
Oh, she must love that, huh?
Did you hear from her?
Oh, I had her permission.
Yeah, but she loved it, right?
She loved it, yeah.
Taking her outside to play.
I didn't interview her.
She's a collector, you know.
Oh, yeah.
She collects graphic art.
She goes, in fact, I interviewed her at an ephemera show.
Is that right?
Yeah, that's where we set up.
That's Woody.
Woodrow comes along and he plays.
Oh, you didn't get them all by name, huh?
Yeah.
And then Rosie, Rosie wasn't real smart.
He loses the ball.
Woodrow finally kicked it.
That's crazy.
No, but for the art here, this all had to be original art.
Oh, it's all facial photographs.
Really?
Yeah.
I have a closet full of photographs that we make ourselves.
A shot like this?
Yeah.
Well, no, there's that.
And then there's this, and then there's this, and then there's a drawing in there.
It's collage, really.
It's collage, yeah.
And then you just throw it all together.
And this one's kind of sweet because there's a nice little story about this quilt.
This quilt was given to me by, Rosie didn't actually sleep on this quilt, but this was given to me by Truman Capote's aunt.
It belonged to Truman Capote when I was a kid.
Oh.
And there's a vampire.
Grandpa again.
But here, you see the image here, and then you see it again here.
This image is being worked on on the table.
Now, do you identify who you are in this story?
I don't know.
I mean, in the course of the story, do you say what Grandpa does for his work?
No, no, no.
He just kind of suggests that it goes to his work.
And is this your home here?
No, it's not.
I had to make this up for compositional purposes.
This is a house at Smith College.
Because I needed something where I could get this over here and this over here.
So you appear twice in this book.
Yes.
If, because this is a month away from being done, you know.
You're on the cover of this one.
A new puppy.
Now, which puppy is this?
This is a puppy that didn't make it.
This is a puppy that... Do you have a cat?
I have a cat.
Tootsie is that cat.
attacking my poor dog and she's got glaucoma.
She can't see.
I go crazy and I can't get mad at the cat because the cat's got a heart condition.
You know, she's got a heart murmur and so you can't, you know, I'm going to be the cause of her demise.
We have more medical conditions with our animals.
They've been saying for eight years that it's going to kill her.
She's been supposed to die for five years.
This cat actually had a stroke.
We took her to Tufts.
I mean, we should see the bill.
It's as much for the cat as it is for humans.
Look at that, yeah.
But she came back, and she's fine.
We're supposed to give her medication.
You can't because she'll bite your fingers off, so we don't.
She's still alive.
Yeah.
They won't even give her anesthesia, but this cat is so venerable.
She's been hit by a car and crippled, and she survives with the heart.
My cat's Nick and Nora.
Yeah, well, where's Big Molly?
So how many collaborations have there been between Isabel and Barry?
Three.
So I knew Puppy, and my cat's Nick and Nora, right, were the other two?
What is this?
I always get Scholastic, right?
Are they all Scholastic?
This one is kind of funny too.
This one is dedicated to all of the dogs.
Because Woody had just died, so there's Woody's collar hump.
So this is all of the dogs we've ever seen on this.
This is 1996.
And this is our new puppy.
So here we are.
The cats are hearing the news that we have a new puppy coming.
There's Grandpa laying down, reclining.
Jesus, he said, this one just sounded like this, I'm leaving, buh-bye.
And Rosie sees the new puppy coming and, buh-bye, I'm out of here too.
And there's the first of the self-portraits.
And there's Izzy with a very bad hair day.
Wish I'd done that painting over.
There's Grandpa's legs.
Yeah, this is the thing I'm talking about, I want to take a story beyond where it is, it's just that there's cats not mentioned anywhere in here, but they have already been in this book, so now it's this attitude that cats have, this nonchalance, and this, you know.
The cat's in every picture in the book.
Who's scholastic?
Are they their own or are they reading to somebody?
They make a big mistake if they don't send them to me.
You're like I'm supposed to say something important.
At the end of the book, what the hell?
You got libraries full of books.
That's not going to be the end of books.
Books are going to all be here.
Well, but I'm taking part in a conference next year, ALA in Chicago.
They've asked me to take part in this.
And the theme is, are all libraries destined to become museums of the book?
Every library is like a museum, and every book is an object.
Like almost a rare object, an artifact.
Of course there will continue to be books, but are we...
in jeopardy as some people... I mean, will the Bible be read in a computer?
I doubt that.
A hundred years from, I think the only way to read the Bible is probably as a codex.
Well, I think you have two different experiences going on here.
I... Let's walk in the kitchen.
I desperately need a glass of water or something.
If you don't buy any of this.
There's a... What's the name?
Octavo?
Yeah, Octavo.
Octavo coming out of Adobe, where this guy is...
Downloading these books onto, let's see, a little bit of glass.
Just water, anything.
Do you want some ice in it?
Nah, actually I'd like it just... This water comes 700 feet down.
700 feet, right here?
Right through granite.
Wow.
Oh, thank you.
And he's putting these things into digital, digital form.
Putting books?
That's a digital book?
What do you think of that?
Well, you see, that's what I think.
You're getting two different experiences.
Myself, as doing some research or something, I think it'd be great for me to be able to go to one of the rarest books in the world and have it there on my screen and so forth and be able to sort of turn the pages virtually.
That's one experience, and I think it has its place, has a value.
But it does not take the place of holding that object.
And I think the sensuousness of the object, the intimacy of the object, the turning of the pages, the warmth of that I don't think can be replaced by a machine.
I did an interview for this new book.
I have a lot of this in there.
Those are things people can't get their hands on.
He does.
Right.
That's exactly what I mean.
And he digitizes the most scarce of all.
And they're not selling, by the way.
I don't know if it says it in this article.
Have you heard that?
Are they successful?
No.
I don't think they are.
You know, there was a study done.
Somebody told me about this.
I can grab hold this corner, pull it over, and look, there you go.
Is this the first project you use this kind of stuff with?
Yeah.
I mean, to this degree.
What do you think of it?
I love it.
It allows me to do what I have done throughout my entire career of making illustrations for books, except that it allows me to do it faster and cleaner.
Is he off on the snowmobile?
For instance here, if I do this again, I can take that bird up to this size, or I can take him up to this size, and I can do this in a second.
And what do you call this particular act?
Does it have a name for you?
It's called transformation.
Transformation.
Transformation command, yeah.
You could do something like this.
You even turned his head there.
Oh, yeah.
I can push it up this way.
Computers, huh?
Isn't it dazzling?
I mean, it is.
It dazzling.
What you can do.
And you actually are being an artist here, right?
Oh, absolutely.
These are photographs taken by other people, but you're manipulating them and putting them into a... Appropriating them, I think, is the challenge.
That could do something silly, like get down here and make him just peep up over the top like that.
Wouldn't that be funny?
Oh, yeah.
Well, that's great.
And so then when you have something you like, what do you do, a printout?
Then you just command save it.
Then I print it out there and it comes out in those things I was just showing you.
Then I transfer it to the block and I redraw the whole thing.
So I finish this and I want to close it out and all I have to do is I actually have to go back to this.
They're going to ask me if I want to save the changes and I say no.
That's exactly the way it was when I came here.
Now, did you basically do this with all of your pictures before?
You're starting with something else?
Yeah, always.
I've always done this.
I came across a word years ago in an article about David Smith, the sculptor.
He referred to himself as a Brickoleur, and then a guy writing— Did you do the word slowly?
Brickoleur, B-R-I-C-O-L-E-U-R, Brickoleur.
And a guy writing in the Boston Herald translated it as a putterer.
I had told him that it was a word that David Smith used, meaning that he was a user of discarded things.
Well, Alan Mandelbaum's son, Jonathan, lives in Paris, and has always lived in Paris, and he translates French, technical French into English, or English, technical English into French.
one or the other.
So his son's also a translator?
Yeah.
It's a technical language.
Yeah, but nevertheless, a second generation.
So I write him on email.
So I got Jonathan's email, and I write him this.